mike woznia is here and we're going to
talk about bodybuilders and what
bodybuilders need to learn that they
haven't learned
yet and a lot of things that get
published in research
a lot of things that are common
knowledge with academia don't end up
always getting to the people who are
trying to make results happen in the gym
gyms are not really incentivized to give
people results they typically just give
people access or selling personal
training
and
you know they don't really care what you
do and even if you're being ineffective
and that's that's too bad
because uh there's certainly
more effective approaches than people
are doing now
one of the things i regularly say is if
regular weight lifting and cardio for
weight loss works so well where are all
the fit people
right yeah pretty much everybody with uh
impressive physique has like a
supplement contract yeah yeah it just
shows you how rare that is it's really
rare to be in great shape
and a lot of people should be in great
shape millions of people should be in
great shape but
they're going about doing it wrong let's
talk about mike your journey
uh when you started moving away from
weights moving away from weights i i
guess it really started
four years ago
when i was getting desperate because i i
hadn't
i hadn't competed at that point
in
around 40 years because of an injury
they kept egging me from squatting yeah
um
after a quadricep attendant issue i had
you know heard it and
i every time i would rehabilitate it
and working my way up again
um
it eventually just would start swelling
up and there was nothing i felt
absolutely defeated and the funny thing
is
you know that's when
uh phil hernan had met you
and i had this you know small
interaction with you and you you talked
about balance and the bands
and then i started paying attention to
the the band thing because back when i
was younger all bands were were these
like surgical tubing things that we yeah
bands bands used to be a joke
yeah or they're great for rehab you know
like an outward rotation movement where
you just outwardly rotate so just to
rebuild like your rotator cuff and
surgery or something yeah yeah exactly
and i and i had a lot of shoulder issues
from uh obviously bench pressing most
guys that have shoulder issues it's from
bench pressing
um and they're not doing anything wrong
that's just what bench pressing does to
your shoulders correct yeah you get
multiple it in the stretch position and
it eventually is going to tear them up
you know started adding bands to
my lifts and i remember i was training
this one girl
and i had her doing you know lateral
raises with light dumbbells and then i
would put this band around her wrists
and her delts just started growing
you know
yeah and they they actually got
remarkably then we started adding bands
to bench press they started adding bands
you know i started doing double leg work
on on balance and that caused my hips
to engage properly i started using my my
abductors the adductors the glutes that
you know everything came in together and
it would it held everything in a place
where
in order to balance perfectly i had to
do a perfect squat
you know i couldn't put a load forward
yeah
i didn't have my exercise on an unstable
surface
and you're going to fire everything
yeah
everything was just equally
tuned in and my joints weren't getting
like there was no pain so i and i
started working deeper and deeper and
deeper and then i started adding a band
over my shoulders
well eventually what i would start doing
is you know going back to squatting then
i would get set back again yeah sure i
kind of had thought like competing was
gonna be the end of it all for me you
know it was done i was getting older
screw it you know and
um
i was open to still training guys
but i was working
these long hours in these weld shops and
i
i was training
i was still going to the gym but my legs
like i would just do what i could you
know and it was
it was always a depressing thing but it
was well over a year ago now
um
i started
doing single single leg work
and just adding bands to it
yeah and all these guys are telling me
oh i've worked with those bands and they
don't do anything and you know but they
never really just worked with bands and
kept doing it
yeah they didn't really give it a shot
they threw a band on something they were
doing and
yeah they've been thrown out
you throw it on a weight and then you
know that people talk about how that
gets you between plateaus well that's
because the muscle's pushing harder
through the whole movement and it's
going to hypertrophy more and it gets
stronger
it's not strengthening really the end
it's not strengthening the end of the
movement it's strengthening the muscle
altogether it's one muscle you know you
fire more tissue when you're in your
stronger range
yeah
right maybe it's not it's not like all
these guys are talking about how you're
creating this kinetic energy it'll throw
it at the end or whatever you're
strengthening the end of your of your
movement or whatever i'm like true and
there's sitting in the
your max the amount you can go lift is
going up it's and so obviously you knew
phil hernand very well and yeah
he'd been one of my very good friends
for last
12 years and i just trusted him
completely
um
he never steered me wrong
and he had been doing the ban
pretty much that's it for the last
i'm going to say three years
yeah that's how long we were we were
working
he trained uh cedric macmillan
with bands and you know cedric was very
impressed with it yeah oh i i uh there's
i got some great pictures on the website
and cedric using the x3 okay yeah yeah
he graduated to the x3 yeah okay
and then he had introduced me uh just
briefly to another guy that we you and i
had actually discussed earlier
and all these guys look great and
they're just using these bands and i'm
like okay well i'm gonna give it a try
and i i actually got a lot of backlash i
couldn't believe the amount of people
that just thought i was completely
stupid like i had friends getting ahold
of me like are you not bodybuilding
anymore like i'm just wondering what
what avenue you're going down
right and i i said well i hurt so bad
and i'm just i'm willing to try anything
you know right um and phil if phil's if
phil believes that even though he might
be crazy at the moment um he's never
steered me wrong and phil's not stupid
by any means and as we found out phil
was never crazy and actually brilliant
because yeah stick out
the right thing to do
and you want to and then so i'm doing
the single leg work adding bands and
then phil finally said mike
about a year ago he said you're not
going to know what bands do unless you
just use them
you know only
yeah
i'm like okay
screw it you know
i started using just bands and find in
different ways and he what he did was he
said mike you're
you know you like to
you're scientific you like to dig in he
said try a bunch of stuff and get back
to me and see what you come up with
you know
well
i'm doing all this crazy balancing and
putting bands on everything and rigging
them all over the gym and drying this
and that and whatever
and then i'm starting to figure them out
in my head
and i'm thinking okay so let's say a
really easy thing to remember to think
of as like a a curl
um
and
you'd start out with a weight like say a
barbell curve probably
when you start out it's going to be the
same it's going to be you'll see you've
got 80 pounds there with it you know a
barbell curl
as you come up it's it's 80 pounds right
out of the hole and then actually after
you pass
halfway up because it's you know it's
with static resistance against gravity
you start to lose
you know
when you approach the fully contracted
position the weight actually goes down
because the lever arm is becoming closer
to the origin
and the weird part is in your head you
don't feel this weight in your hand
so you're kind of you know at first it's
weird
but then i started noticing i could pay
unless paying it less paying attention
to the weight i started paying attention
to the way my muscle felt that's right
because you don't have to drop
yeah so okay
you start it's like 20 pounds of
resistance and it's kind of funny
feeling at first yeah but as you come up
it gets to the point where it's like
comes to a dead stop and it is the
hardest contraction you've ever felt in
your entire life and guys that tell me
oh yeah you can get a real good pump
with that but it ain't going to build
any muscle and i'm like i started
thinking like well resistance is
resistant yeah you know
know what you're doing my muscle doesn't
have a freaking clue what's going on
there and not only that is it wasn't
limited to a linear plane in gravity
pulling it straight down this stuff
could go all over the place so the
stability of it was you know pretty soon
your whole you know like you're
stabilizing to stay in it and then your
muscles getting detached and then the
more of firing growth hormone gets
upregulated it all kind of dovetails
together
all the principles we've been talking
about when you go to fatigue
using a strong level of variable
resistance
correct yep and i i went
i started thinking about it
and you know like every rep would get a
little shorter
you know what i mean
i started thinking well rep ranges don't
matter as much anymore because when you
use a set load
when you fail at the top you're
definitely not going to get it out of
the bottom right it's done then you at
that point you'd have to drop a weight
and then do like a drop set right and
then that discontinues the contraction
blood starts rushing in to recover the
muscle yep
and you've got to start don't really
have the benefit you have no hypoxic
benefit you're not going to change your
myostatin levels you just i mean
basically your drop set just like [__]
everything up yeah
yeah even even it does create a better
pump and they've proven that the pump
lowers myostatin right obviously because
it's hitting the ceiling of that muscles
stretching it and it's like well we're
gonna have to expand you know
but
so let's say at the first rapid you hit
this wall at 100 pounds and pretty soon
it's 99 pounds and it's 98.6 pounds
so
as you come up you recruit all these
fibers you're recruiting fibers into the
contraction rather than just out of the
bottom right
so
you know like
all these fibers
they get contracted and then they start
failing from the strongest mm-hmm and
pretty soon you're getting about halfway
through the end
static holds you're just holding the
weight that you can normally lift
but you can pull against it's like
you're hitting a wall it's frustrating
for a lot of people because they don't
understand it definitely feels different
i i
mean
when developing the x3
uh i i
i definitely had the same it's funny
because i get irritated by the trolls
and like oh weightlifting you know i
like the way it feels or whatever and
i'm like yeah okay i guess results don't
matter
but i get it because when i develop my
prototype
it feels like yeah because you like
seeing that
big amount of iron moving around you
know
on a bench
when you like i remember the first time
i did 225 for repetitions it was like
wow like i really liked
seeing that weight move i felt cool i
was like that's something i've never
done that before
and then when you're just using banding
exclusively so you know i mean if
those you have trouble picturing this so
i've got
banding hooked here and then wrapped
around my back let's say i go to 20
repetitions with 550 pounds
and then i can't get there anymore well
then
i mean this is what mike's talking about
then you start shortening up the rep
rate so you're dealing with less weight
because you're not stretching the band
as far
so you're dealing with less weight here
so now i'm doing repetitions with 300
pounds
and then i can't get there anymore and
then i'm doing repetitions with 200
pounds
and then
at the end i can only do this
like just maybe an inch of movement but
you have fatigued every range of motion
and every fiber within the muscle and
that is something you will never do with
a weight it cannot happen
and that is so when i talk about how
variable resistance and
people get wrapped up and like well how
much weight is that like okay it's 550
because i just give people a point of
reference
but that's not the point
stone not the point
you know
you know okay in in
but they're kind of halfway right
because and i'm going to reference two
studies and we'll put this in the show
notes there's a fry in 2010
and linamo in 2005
two different studies that showed
that the amount of testosterone activity
that you have in your body has very
little to do with how much testosterone
you have
coursing through your body it has to do
with how many receptor sites
are open in looking for that
testosterone
so yeah
now
that's right that's right yeah you you
can have all kinds of testosterone in
your system even exogenously
and it's not going to do what you think
it's going to do unless you're putting
the heavy load on the body what we're
talking about right now
is a superior strategy
right heavy it's not heavy
as in on a bar it's strategy to get the
most force
through the muscle and that's going to
trigger the growth the most force and
the most fatigue
is going to
trigger the maximum amount of growth so
here's here's an interesting observation
i've been a a testosterone replacement
therapy patient
since i was 28 i had some testicular
damage
and uh rugby just a bad rugby hit um
and then
what i noticed was i had a prescription
for
what
seemed like a normal i didn't have any
point of reference so it's simply a
normal dose
and then as soon as i developed the x3
like i've been i've been taking trt for
years and years and lifting for years
and years so from basically 28 to 39
i put on maybe a couple pounds of muscle
the best thing that happened with
testosterone was um
i i felt a lot more calm
like i felt i i had like a little
anxiety
yeah just just well-being and uh you
know my the reason i first noticed it
was i was having uh heart palpitations
and they were like oh your cardiac
muscle is really weak and i was like
we're talking about a run like 80
minutes
like just sprint stop sprint stop in a
rugby game
like my heart is dynamite and they're
like uh
no like your cardiac muscle is
underdeveloped so that's how i knew i
had to get
a prescription for testosterone and then
when i did i saw almost no muscular
benefit
but then here's the weird thing so i
started using variable resistance at
very high high ratio
variable resistance which is what what
x3 is so as i was developing the x3
my i go in for additional blood work and
my physician would say your free
testosterone is almost zero
isn't it
right and
i did not know about these two studies
at that moment and so i'm like
that's weird so he's like we're gonna up
your dose because it i mean i don't know
where it's going it was disappearing
and
so he raised it up a little bit and sure
enough six months later he needed to
raise it up again and sure enough six
months later look i've never had to take
any sort of counter measure from my trt
like a lot of guys like they have to do
uh you know an anti-estrogen or uh
aromatase inhibitor or something like
that you're using it
right and so because the muscles using
it and i know the muscles using it
and so like i i gave this interview for
this national geographic documentary and
because what i had to say was not
controversial enough they cut it
which is just just
i was like i was like i'm actually
giving some useful information here the
other [__] in this documentary i don't
know
but
uh it was really funny because it's like
if
people
administer people who are let's say not
trt but people but like using
performance enhancing drugs
if they proceeded with this logic
i believe there could be somebody who's
like a mr olympia-looking guy
who
may actually not need to take nearly the
amount
of
stuff that people do
i completely agree because you're
matching the hormone with the use
yeah you actually have a way to track it
it's free to sausage
what i have found john is is you know
testosterone doesn't cause you to
directly just get big
there's a lot of guys that walk around
with a lot of body hair and a deep voice
they don't have a lot of muscle you're
right um
most actually most lose
testosterone exogenously it's causing
that constant activation of the muscles
and if with a lot of times with weights
we stagnate so quick because
the tendon gets as strong as the muscle
but when you're causing damage to that
tendon eventually it limits your
progress yeah you know but
and then you're not getting that that
contraction where it's that load
increases all the way to the very bitter
end
and it's and it's activating those
receptors so same thing since i
you know obviously it was different uh
bodybuilding when i was younger took
uh steroids and then i came off of them
when i was like 29 years old
and my natural levels were like 54
nanograms
and the guy calls me mike that's like a
woman
i'm like well no wonder my girlfriend
thinks i'm cheating on her
i wasn't sleeping with her
you're really pretty but that's about it
yeah
um
so obviously i went on hrt
and for years i had taken 300 milligrams
a week
recently i made a post telling everybody
i'm micro dosing i'm taking 20
milligrams a day of this testosterone
energy
uh six days a week so it comes to 120
milligrams a week
and
i'm holding all kinds of muscle yeah you
know that's real smooth i like it
obviously i'm a little
flat right now because of i you know not
eating for three days but
you can look the you can look the
pictures up i've been documenting
training
um
what what i've looked like through this
whole just using bands
um
and i'm getting away with use like
basically taking less than most guys do
hrt wise
and see better results
and you know some people there's a lot
of guys that take so much [__] they're
like oh he's probably full of [__] and
like try it
yeah you know like like try it
he's the language right
completely wasted yeah doesn't go and do
what you think it's doing if your body
doesn't have the receptor for it
yeah it's not being used you're not
growing but you're just causing side
effects and all kinds of what i've
noticed is
if you're not what the larger doses of
steroids seem to do is the bro split
everybody talks about if you're doing
the once a week training
all that stimulus now we're doing 12
frickin sets in a day and not training
it for a week
[Music]
then i guess because you've taken so
much that you can recover from that
ridiculous amount of volume yeah
don't you don't shrink as fast because
your your protein synthesis is up you're
not you don't have the protein breakdown
like you would naturally
and the cortisol's down so you don't
shrink by the time you get to that that
next dose or that the next i should say
the next time you work that muscle
but if you if you know how to work that
muscle
very efficiently
multiple times a week you're stimulating
it constantly you don't need to worry
about the atrophy effect because you're
hitting it before it happens
right
if that makes sense to you yeah it it
makes absolute sense and yeah so so
these large doses seem to help a guy
like hold his size
but it's not necessary if you changed
your training with the variable
resistance the higher frequency
you know max stimulus
least amount of damage the more times
you can train a muscle stimulate it and
recover
and do it again the better off you're
gonna be
we'll cover this in another show but one
of the things that uh that mike mike and
i were talking about over the past uh
couple weeks was like
soreness and like tearing a muscle and
muscle damage
yeah uh it's the opposite of what a lot
of people think a lot of people think
you you you actually do small tears in
the muscle and then it recovers and
grows
no small tears in the muscle actually
ensure that you do not grow
and it is only when you do not create
micro tears that you do grow so they are
inversely related the more damage you do
the muscle
you know the uh the the less
you're gonna grow and i would say the
last it's really funny like
between
high school and the time i was 40
i
probably gained other than like puberty
and [__] like just growing up you know i
might have gained 10 pounds of muscle in
that huge period of time after turning
40 i've gained 60 pounds of muscle
which is not supposed to be a thing like
you turn 40 and everybody's like oh you
know well done
all like muscular or not
and you know like it's too late for you
yeah that's not true
yeah it's beautiful we can you know as
you as you use the testosterone and you
can you know
add more you're not going to get side
effects you're using it but you're going
to gain muscle yeah now it's like the
wave of the future here it's very
exciting it's very exciting it is
exciting and it's also
it's going to it's going to be safer for
everybody like the pro one of the
problems with bodybuilding
that
never makes it
you know because the problems with
diuretics are much bigger the problems
with
one of the biggest problems bodybuilding
has is 300 pound people who are lean
because 300 pounds of muscle is putting
a lot more stress on the human heart
than being a 300 pound fat guy because
the 300 pound fat guy
that extra body fat is not drawing blood
it doesn't have a demand no you're not
vascular yeah right so from just about
800 horse engine with a two barrel
carburetor right
how much people are going to get that
fuel pump
yeah yeah you don't um
i i like i like car analogies but not
everybody
is is a car guy so yeah yeah yeah like
um like i often say like when when like
uh
you know like a lot of
performance-enhancing drug users they'll
be able to affect the muscle but they're
not affecting the tendons and ligaments
at the same rate
because like but we haven't figured out
how to anabolically enhance tendons and
ligaments from a chemical uh biochemical
exogenous standpoint
so you see a lot of you see a lot of
bodybuilders with extreme muscularity
but it's like putting a formula one
engine in like a prius
you know blow the wheels right off the
car as soon as you like hit the
accelerator
because strong enough to rip yourself
apart yeah yeah you don't have the
tendons and ligaments that's another
thing that variable resistance does when
you're when you're loading
towards the end closer to lockout that
will actually grow tendons and ligaments
but when you're leaking weights you're
going to pick a weight that you can
handle back here
which will never really affect the
tendons and ligaments because it's just
not heavy enough it's going to cause
micro tears in the tendon and the
tendons take a lot longer
and you said it earlier and that builds
scar tissue
and then the scar tissue will have you
rip your tricep your pack
and that's why like seasoned guys who
bench press we've been doing heavy bench
press for a long time
all of a sudden they rip their pec doing
something that they've been doing for
years like not like they're not going
for a pr
they're just benches like why did i rip
my my pack well because every time
you're benching you're creating
cumulative damage so let's break that
cycle let's have you use a high ratio of
variable resistance
and then you're going to do great and
you're not going to have any of the
downsides
yeah i know a guy that did that once
with his bicep you know he always curl a
lot of weight
and he was putting a radiator hose on a
truck and his bicep popped off this
just trying to put a hose on the
radiator you know it's like it
was not even yeah he was probably just
at an awkward angle not even really
stretching his bicep
right it's because the
scar tissue everywhere
yep and i'm guessing that guy's not
lifting
heavy now no
use variable resistance
with great proficiency
yeah yeah i've got a lot of friends that
you know um
lifted with me when we were kids and
they still were like hobby-wise they
like to work out in the garage or
whatnot
that have been following me and they've
been ordering x3s and every
i got that one guy that said it's it's
wasn't he's uh voodoo band magic his
body doesn't hurt anymore yeah
it's
his turn makes me laugh because he's
like yeah wasn't he in his voodoo band
magic he goes like mike i realized man
like he's right it's it's like everybody
that i tell to start training this way
uh and you know or or the x3 users
they're like i just can't understand
like is it really like apparently really
is this simple
and and it's like silly it's it's
only challenging because there's so much
that we were all taught
and it's not that those things were
wrong like now when i wrote this book
when i wrote weightlifting as a waste of
time this title is to get your attention
correct
and you know have i called it like you
know the variable resistance method or
something like that
right who would have bought that i sold
100 000 copies of that book pretty much
instantly uh because people were like oh
[__] this guy you know i wanna i wanna
read this so i can discredit him and
then they read it and they're like i
really gotta rethink my training like
this is a
charlie sheen of weightlifting for a
minute and then i did
and then when it started working then
you weren't a bad guy anymore no no no
no
it's okay you know the guys i think i'm
a bad guy it's like you know the fact
that i wrote the book and everybody
started talking about i mean keep in
mind like it was difficult for me to
cross into fitness because i was always
in medical device like osteostrong was
the technology that i invented and it's
to treat bone density and
boy like you know people with bone
density challenges are typically
post-menopausal women they're not really
even online talking about that much
right so like i really didn't have much
of an online presence so i really kind
of
had to kick everybody in the nuts to get
their attention and that that was really
what the book was about but there's 260
scientific references no 250 scientific
references 260 pages
uh
yeah and it tells the whole story of
everything we're talking about but
we're going to wrap this one up and
we're going to keep doing these
and really focus on like what
bodybuilders need to be more successful
and to have longer careers
and uh
even even treat bodybuilding as like a
longevity thing because like right now
the way people approach it it's a
self-destructive thing
and we want people to be able to be fit
and healthy and happy
you know up until they're elderly
and right
that's the mission you can't look
amazing for being 65 70 years old
absolutely
yeah right and there's people there's
people there's anomalies that have had
that happen to them hold it off yeah
right but we're gonna have it so that
everybody can be like that right right
yep
awesome this is a good show uh we're
gonna do it again real soon okay thanks